---
excerpt: 'Stereotypes on Lincoln -- What was the real cause of the Civil War?'
slug: lincoln
title: Lincoln
---

# Lincoln

Known as a great emancipator who abolished slavery and brought justice to America, Lin-coln is highly praised for his leadership in the Civil War, and his signing of the Emancipation Proclamation. However, at the same time, there’s necessity of facing the fact that Lincoln was a racist and white supremacist who abolished slavery for pragmatic purposes.

## What Was the Civil War About?

History textbooks say that the Civil War was fought because of disputes about slavery be-tween the North and the South, and the South wanted to keep slavery when the North fought for abolition. Even though different historians disagree about causes that separated the country, the Civil War was in fact related to slavery, yet it was not fought on grounds of moral justifications, nor did the North go to war to free the slaves, nor was the abolition of slavery the direct trigger of secession of southern states.
According to BBC documentary film American History’s Biggest Fibs, the southern econ-omy heavily depended on agriculture, which would mean that they needed to export their products frequently. However, the northern economy depended on industries, and did not require significant exporting of products. Therefore, the North wanted to raise tariffs, as exporting was not crucial to them, but this would make exporting more expensive for the South. This conflict in tax policies is one of the first key causes of the conflict. When the West joined the United States, the North and the South also fought to get the West on their side and adopt their economic strategy.
Evidence also shows that the war was also fought for different conceptions on the power of individual states. Even though South Carolina’s Declaration of Causes of Secession claimed that the state of South Carolina seceded because of the attempt from the central government to abolish slavery, the document shows that South Carolina was more concerned about their constitutional rights, than about the issue of slavery itself. It saw the central government’s attempt to abolish slavery as a weapon of violating the sovereignty of states, further centralizing power in the nation. The document is a defense of power, not slavery.
If the South wanted to maintain slavery, they would not turn down the constitutional pro-tection of slavery offered by the Congress. When he talked about slavery, Lincoln claimed “I have no objection to its being made express and irrevocable.” Only a small percentage of southerners owed slaves anyway. Therefore, slavery could not be the direct reason and motivation for war on behalf of the South.
The North did not go to war to end slavery, but solely for the sake of unity of the country. Lincoln said: “If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that.” General Grant commented “The sole object of this war is to restore the Union.” Furthermore, Union Generals Grant and Sherman were slave owners, when Confeder-ate General Robert E. Lee, who called slavery “an institution of a moral and political evil,” was abolitionist.
Therefore, the Civil War was not directly about slaves, but conflicting interests between the North and the South. Different historians disagree about what specifically were the conflicting interests, but it most likely included disagreements over tariffs and disputes over constitutional rights of states and governments.

## Was Lincoln Abolitionist? What Was His Stance on Slavery? Was he racist?

Lincoln was not abolitionist. William Lloyd Garrison, leader of the abolitionist movement, said that Lincoln “had not a drop of anti-slavery blood in his veins.” He “shared the racial preju-dices of most of his white contemporaries,” said historian Lerone Bennett.
When Lincoln was an Illinois legislator, when he was a congressman before the Civil War, he opposed abolitionists and supported the fugitive slave law. By no means did he actively support the immediate abolition of slavery. Moreover, he actively supported colonization as a solution to slavery.
He had two political heroes: Henry Clay and Thomas Jefferson, both of whom favored col-onization to solve the problem of slaves. They saw no way of the two races living together peace-fully, and supported sending the slaves to other colonies.
He publicly advocated for colonization in 1852. In his Peoria speech of 1854, Lincoln called slavery a “monstrous injustice,” which is often quoted by authors, but in the same speech, he asserted that he wanted to send the slaves “to Liberia—to their own native land.” He also con-sidered sending freed slaves to Panama to construct a canal. In his message to the Congress in De-cember 1862, Lincoln affirmed “I strongly support colonization,” and used the word “deportation.”
When he was drafting the Emancipation Proclamation, he invited freed black men and women to the White House to get them to support colonization. He said, because of the “differ-ences” between two races, it would be “better for us both, therefore, to be separated.” This gener-ated outrage among the black community. After the Emancipation Proclamation was issued, he never publicly mentioned colonization.
Though Lincoln perhaps had more conscience of right and wrong than defenders of slav-ery, Lincoln was racist. In fact, he said, “I am not, nor ever have been, in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races…I will say in addition to this that there is a physical difference between the white and black races which I believe will for-ever forbid the two race living together on terms of social and political equality.” Historian Ler-one Bennet even argues that racism is one of Lincoln’s most deeply held beliefs.
Did the Emancipation Proclamation Free All the Slaves of America? Why did Lincoln free the slaves?
The emancipation was a military policy. Lincoln thought emancipation could further un-dermine the Confederacy while providing the Union with a new source of manpower to crush re-bellion from the South. As enslaved people flee Southern plantations, this would damage the Con-federacy, as when slaves abandon their owners, this would weaken the slave dependent economy.
In July 1862, Lincoln first presented his draft of the preliminary Emancipation Proclama-tion to his cabinet. Secretary of State William Seward suggested that he should wait until things were better for the Union, or emancipation might look like the last hope of an almost defeated na-tion. Lincoln agreed and returned to edit the draft over the summer. In September, the Battle of Antietam gave Lincoln the opportunity he needed. He thus presented the Emancipation Proclama-tion.
Nevertheless, the emancipation did not apply to slave states near the border between the Union and the Confederacy, such as Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri; all of which were loyal to the Union. Lincoln also exempted Southern states under Union control to gain sup-port from local white people.
The Emancipation Proclamation without doubt marks a more than important turning point not only in the Civil War, but the entire history of America. However, more accurately, it did not suddenly free all slaves of America, and did not take place solely for moral reasons.
What did he do to Native Americans?
Lincoln’s attitude toward Native Americans is ambivalent and contradictory. After the Da-kota Uprising, or the Sioux War, in 1862, 393 Dakotas were charged. However, because the trials were corrupted, as Native Americans didn’t speak good English and had no lawyers. Lincoln, therefore, ordered a review of every charge. Ultimately, only 39 sentences were confirmed. Lin-coln, in this case, does present sympathy toward minorities.
However, he allowed army generals to dictate Indian policies. He lectured Native Ameri-cans on civilization: “I can only say that I can see no way in which your race is to become as nu-merous and prosperous as the white race except by living as they do, by the cultivation of the earth.” He signed the Homestead Act of 1862, which further promoted westward expansion and displacement of Indians.
To conclude, Lincoln, therefore, is not free of discrimination against Native Americans. This does not mean that he justifies all injustice toward them. His policies toward them are am-biguous in attitude.
Who Was Lincoln?
Lincoln was a remarkable president. He reunited the nation, abolished slavery, and con-tributed greatly to the development of American history. He was a master of the English language. He was a successful and insightful man who made correct decisions. He was great leader. He freed the slaves; for that, he ought be praised. However, he was unavoidably at the same time a racist who did not believe in racial equality. He was not abolitionist but someone who supported coloni-zation as a solution to slavery. He did not abolish slavery simply on moral grounds. He was known toward his sympathy toward minorities, though he as well was racist. He was not entirely friendly but ambivalent toward Native Americans. There’s necessity of facing the dishonorable side of him whilst considering his due; only then can we make a more objective and accurate judgement about the sixteenth president of America.
